# ZEngine

ZEngine (placeholder name) is a custom game engine built in [Jai](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jai_(programming_language)) developed for a [WeGo turn-based](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timekeeping_in_games#Simultaneously_executed_and_clock-based_turns) space strategy game.

## Overview

ZEngine is built around a custom Entity Component System called ZECS (also placeholder) and a GPU-driven Vulkan renderer. 
The engine targets Homeworld 2-era visual complexity with modern rendering techniques with the goal of achieving higher scene complexity and playercounts. 

The engine and game are intended to be tightly knit, with as few generalizations as possible and avoiding features or capabilities that will not be strictly necessary for the game itself. 
The goal is to keep complexity low and development speed high. As such, many features common to more generalized engines (such as an editor window) are not planned at all. 

The engine began development mid-2025 as a part-time project and is heavily WIP.

## Technical Highlights

- **[OpenMPI-threading/Wide-By-Default](#threading)** — Code is executed wide (across multiple threads) by default, only going single-threaded when necessary. 
- **[ZECS](#zecs)** — Archetype-based ECS with heavy compile-time focus to leverage Jai's strong metaprogramming features. The composition of archetypes is known at compile time allowing the compiler to generate highly optimized queries.
- **[Shader-like queries](#zecs)** — ZECS queries are shader-like executing the same chunk of code across all relevant entities, leveraging the wide-by-default threading.
- **[Vulkan 1.3+](#rendering)** — A modern Vulkan renderer with a focus on bindless. Multi-draw indirect, device buffer adresses, etc.
- **[Clustered Rendering](#rendering)** — Lighting uses a Clustered Forward/Forward+ system, greatly improving performance while avoiding some of the pitfalls of deferred rendering. 
- **[GPU Compute Focus](#rendering)** — Focus on shifting compute to the GPU, such as light and mesh culling
- **Linear BVH** — A [linear BVH](https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/thinking-parallel-part-iii-tree-construction-gpu/) using Morton codes, highly parallelized to leverage the threading system 
- **More to come**

## Threading
The threading model follows a [wide-by-default design similar to OpenMPI](https://www.rfleury.com/p/multi-core-by-default). 
Code is executed across all threads, sometimes allowing for duplicated execution, and synchronized using barriers. When duplicated execution is not possible, code will go narrow for that block.
The principle is that despite some duplicated execution and sporadically going narrow, the lion's share of the work in the game happens in systems such as ECS queries, linear BVH creation, etc. which are extremely parallelizeable, offsetting performance losses from barriers etc.

## ZECS
ZECS is a custom archetype-based ECS with heavy focus on compile-time code generation. 
Archetypes and queries must be compile time known and execution code is generated by the metaprogram. All queries are executed shader-style with the provided code block executing on each entity relevant to the query. 
The system includes many common features such as archetype components (one component per archetype), tags, and observers. 

## Rendering
The renderer uses a Forward+/Clustered Forward rendering pattern [similar to Doom 2016](https://www.adriancourreges.com/blog/2016/09/09/doom-2016-graphics-study/). The scene is divided along all 3 axes into clusters and light influence is calculated on each cluster, greatly reducing lighting cost and allowing for much greater light counts in a scene.

## Other Features
- **Textured static meshes**
- **Debug shape/mesh rendering (wireframe)**
- **Debug visualizations**
- **Material system, including material instances**
- **Mesh import from glTF**
- **Image/texture import from KTX2**
- **Rebindable inputs**
- **Direct ImGUI rendering**

## Status

Under active development. Currently working on scaffolding for the WeGo turn system.
